sad

I wish my lips could speak the song my heart sings. But the tune is far to lonely to be heard.

is tired of feeling alone yet scared of letting anyone in

I can't explain what is wrong or why the tears are falling, because I don't know the answer myself other than,. I have depression & depression needs no reason

Someone once told me that you have to cry all the tears out of your heart to make room for smiles :) So its okay to cry no matter what.. Remember that :) xXx

I cant wait to go to sleep each night, because at least when I'm sleeping i know you will always be there.

This isn't a status...this is just to show that no status matches my feelings right now. :(

When I cry no one cares, yet when the person next to me sheds one tear everyone trys to help


Why is it that when u know u love someone that u cant have you end up loving them even more???

When you look in my eyes & see the pain inside why do you just keep on creating more pain & breaking me down...


Sometimes it's best to stay quiet. Except the silence can speak volumes without ever saying a word.

One moment in my life, I had everything I wanted, everything I needed. Just one moment later, I realize that it's all gone. What went wrong??

I close my eyes, and I can see a better day. I close my eyes, and pray. I know there's sunshine beyond that rain. I know there's good times beyond that pain(:

says that its not the heartbreak that kills you, the pain comes from all the memories that you have.

Tired of being the person who helps everyone, making ppl laugh, and bein someones shoulder to cry on , cuz when i cry or need help i feel alone< Kelsey Hembree

Why is it that sometimes people make you feel so wanted; and then there's times they act like you are nothing?

I Think I'm Invisible :(

I hate it when you realize that you mean nothing or damn near nothing to someone who means everything to you.

People say i am so pretty, BUT I'm just a girl who has hid their tears and anger to make other people happy.



