negative

People change, things go wrong, shit happens, but life goes on.

Always remember pain makes people change, So don't hurt them when you don't want them to change.

Just because I'm being quiet, that doesn't mean I'm mad. Sometimes I'm just not in the mood to talk.

Sometimes one middle finger isn’t enough to let someone know how you feel. That’s why you have two hands.

Don’t be so happy, I don’t really forgive people, I just pretend like it’s ok and wait for my turn to destroy them.

If I delete your number, you’re basically deleted from my life.

What goes around comes around. That’s what people say. So all the pain you caused me will come back to you someday.

Some people need to open their small minds instead of their big mouths.

That annoying moment when you show someone a picture on your phone, and they start scrolling through the rest.

It sucks when you realize you rejected other people for that one person who wasted your time.

Some people never realise the emotional and mental damage they do to others.

Nobody makes you angry, you decide to use anger as a response.

Never forget what someone says to you when they are angry, because that’s when the truth comes out

They say milk is good for your teeth. You know what else is good for your teeth? Minding your own damn business.

I may look calm, but in my head I’ve killed you about 5 times.

For every minute you are angry….. you lose sixty seconds of happiness… Think about It

My silence doesn’t mean that I quit… It simply means that I don’t want to argue with people who just don’t want to understand!!!

Everything is getting expensive except some people, they are getting cheaper…

I will not delete you or block you. I am keeping you there so you will be able to see how happy I’m without you…

I will not delete you or block you. I am keeping you there so you will be able to see how happy I’m without you…

If you’re going to TALK About Me Behind MY Back, Don’t Smile At Me To My Face!!!!

Never make yourself feel like nothing to make someone else feel like everything..

Holding on to anger is like grasping a hot coal with the intent of throwing it at someone elsee; you are the one who gets burned.’

Anger is poison. You must purge it from your mind or else it will corrupt your better nature.
