sad

It has been three weeks since the tragic events in Isla Vista. While horrific events of this magnitude are always difficult to come to terms with---particularly when something happens this close to home---the couple weeks that followed were really tough for me personally.
As many of you already know, I was part of a large group in an outside seating area of an Isla Vista restaurant when the first shots were fired, and we were incredibly lucky to make it out unharmed despite being two blocks down the road from the initial shooting and just across the street from the I.V. Deli. (Most people in the group have not posted publicly on this, so I will err on the side of caution and not identify them or their affiliations here.)
It was not that night itself that was hardest; though it was stressful and many in our group were somewhat shaken as it happened, everyone stayed remarkably calm, partially because of what little we knew at the time. Instead it was the aftermath that was the worst, as the horrific scale of what had unfolded around me was revealed and the twisted, sickening background became increasingly clear. The haunting realization of how close we had come and the gut-wrenching thought of something happening to anyone in the group (which I found myself in a de facto position of responsibility for) made every excruciating detail hit even harder. For a while, something every five minutes would bring it all rushing back, whether it was hearing the sound of a door slamming or noticing a black BMW in the rearview mirror while driving, or any of a few dozen things with no obvious connection to the event. Before this, I never would have guessed how much of an effect these incidents have on the people at the periphery. But what I’ve gone through pales in comparison to the anguish felt by the people who lost a friend or loved one in this tragedy; their pain will take a lot longer to heal.
Thankfully, I have been doing a lot better in the last week-and-a-half. Part of that is just the passage of time, but I owe a lot to the family, friends, and mentors who helped me through those difficult days. To everyone I reached out to and leaned on for support, your patience, understanding, and insight went a long way toward getting me to a better place mentally and emotionally. I can’t thank you enough.
